[ Music ]
>> As I've shown, Kubrick was
doing the Apollo moon landings
parallel to writing
and directing 2001.
Stanley used this once
in a lifetime opportunity
to create the greatest
esoteric film of all time.
In his creation Kubrick directed
the first alchemical film.
And as we are about to see most
of the confusion concerning
"2001: A Space Odyssey" vanishes
in the face of this truth.
Stanley Kubrick used
the opportunity
of faking the moon landings
to create a work of alchemy.
It took over 30 years for
anyone to realize this.
Now that it is known, it is
a difficult fact to deny.
[ Background Sounds ]
[ Rocket Sounds ]
Within the tradition
of the great work
of alchemy is the idea that
the initiations, explanations
and rituals of alchemy
are embedded
into many great works of art.
The pyramids of Egypt,
the great cathedrals
of France are referred
to as "Books of Stone."
In other words, there is
a deep knowledge built
into these edifices
that only an initiate
of alchemical tradition
can truly understand.
The great architects
and artists,
many of whom were alchemists
themselves had a very clear idea
of what it was that they
were attempting to transmit.
It is only the viewer of these
works that is left in the dark.
As the French writer and
alchemist Fulcanelli revealed
in his masterpiece
"Mysteries of the Cathedral",
the grand churches
of France were built
as part of this great work.
Indeed, anyone who visits
the cathedrals of Europe
but especially France comes
away with this feeling of awe.
But what was his great work
supposed to accomplish?
The answer to this
important question according
to the alchemist was
the very transformation
of the human spirit.
Although it is true that
the symbols and the geometry
of the cathedrals were designed
so that only a true initiate
of the mysteries could really
understand their significance,
the builders and creators of the
great work knew that everyone
who experienced the cathedrals
would come away transformed even
the ones who were not
initiates would still come away
with the feeling of awe.
The truth is that even
radical atheists are amazed
and surprised by the
beauty of Notre-Dame
or Chartres Cathedral.
In his book, The Hunchback of
Notre-Dame, Victor Hugo goes
into this subject with a
great deal of openness.
He explains that the
secret great work
of human transformation was
built into these books of stone
that we call the cathedrals
during the Medieval Period
of European history but
Hugo says the new great book
of nature is not
written on the walls
or in the stones of
churches anymore.
This new version,
this modern version --
this was in the 1800s -- of
the great work had changed
from the symbolic form
to the written word.
Hugo then goes on to identify
the works of William Shakespeare
as the new version
of the great work.
He relates that the great
work containing the ancient
alchemical knowledge of human
transformation was wrapped
up inside the plays written
by the Bard from Stratford.
There is plenty of high
strangeness around the man
who was William Shakespeare
and the plays that were
and are attributed to him.
Whoever the real
Shakespeare was he was steeped
in esoteric knowledge
in the ways of alchemy.
Victor Hugo was right.
Any close examination
of the works
of Shakespeare reveals all the
very same initiatic knowledge
that is also on the walls
of the Gothic cathedrals.
There have been many books
that have touched this subject.
Again like the cathedrals the
plays of Shakespeare seemed
to transform the audience.
This occurs even if most of them
are not on the inside as far
as the secret initiatory
knowledge is concerned.
The great work seems to
have an effect on people
who don't have any idea of
what it is really about.
The artists who have
accomplished the great work are
the ones that still
live with us today.
Shakespeare, da Vinci
and many others.
Shakespeare and the Gothic
cathedrals both have this
ability to appeal to
many disparate layers
of society and culture.
Both bring about a small
transformation inside the human
mind and heart.
This transformation
makes all of us realize
that we can do great
and beautiful things.
That we are more
than just animals.
That the transformation of the
human spirit from the barbaric
to the angelic can only occur
through great works of art.
It was some time ago
when I began contemplating
this idea of The Great Work.
Although The Great Work had been
expressed in stone and later
in literature, how would
it be expressed today?
It is without a doubt
that the tapestry
of human communication
has switched radically.
Just as it was once
based on the symbolic
and then later transferred
into the written word,
now that literary model has
switched to that of cinema,
television and computers.
Out of these three new forms
of communication cinema was the
most obvious to attract someone
who might want to
create a modern version
of The Great Work.
But as I looked out at the
landscape of the history
of cinema, I could not find
The Great Work on film,
at least not at first.
I began watching many classics
in order to see if the director
or writer was attempting
to tell us the great secret
about human transformation.
Many films and film makers
got close, sometimes,
to explaining minor
aspects of The Great Work
but in the end they all failed.
The works of Orson Welles of
course were the most intriguing.
But in the end, even these
failed to achieve the greatness
from which I was looking.
Was it possible that The Great
Work had never been transmitted
through the cinema?
Was it true that cinema was
just too profane a medium
to attract anyone with the right
caliber of mind and spirit?
I mean consider it would take
nearly a superhuman effort
to have all the disparate
talents needed
within one film maker.
This person would need to know
and understand the knowledge
of alchemy, astronomy,
anthropology
and the true history
of the human race.
Besides an Insatiable
curiosity, they would have
to understand the real
nature of the human condition
and of our place
in the universe.
This knowledge would have to
be coupled with the skills
of film making and the business
acumen to pull the project off.
I began to realize the
possibility at this point
that my search for
The Great Work
in cinema was probably in vain.
[music]
>> [whispering] Rosebud.
>> I was in France doing
research for a book
that I was writing about the
French alchemist Fulcanelli
when Stanley Kubrick died.
The French devoted
the next few nights
of their great state
run television channel
to the films of Stanley Kubrick.
For the next few nights I
watched some of the films
of Kubrick that were
presented on channel 3.
I began to realize that no
filmmaker except possibly Welles
had the sense of pictorial
composition and lighting
that Kubrick possessed.
Visually his films were
incredibly stunning
and they had this
amazing ability of holding
up against the erosion of time.
It was just after his
death that I discovered
that there was a version of The
Great Work fashioned into a film
and that it was Stanley
Kubrick who had made this film.
Eventually I would
come to realize
that Stanley Kubrick had made
the greatest film ever created.
I began to realize that Stanley
Kubrick was not just a great
filmmaker, he was the greatest
filmmaker that had ever lived.
I hope to reveal to you that his
film "2001: A Space Odyssey",
actually evokes all aspects
of The Great Work of alchemy.
"2001: A Space Odyssey"
is the book of nature
for the art of cinema,
literally.
I hope to prove that Kubrick
did this with great intention
and that he knew what he
was doing at every step.
There are few mistakes
in this film
but his greatest film is
also his most perfect.
It's important to remember
that unlike "Citizen Kane"
and other great films,
"2001" was a smash hit.
It was actually the first film
where repeat business
kept it going
for months at the box office.
"2001" took an entire
generation by storm.
It was the late 1960s and
the largest generation
on the planet was seeing the
film on a ritualized basis.
Cinerama theaters across
the country reported scores
of drugged out hippies
flocking to the theater
on a nightly basis to
trip out on the film.
Strangely though, no one in
the audience really seemed
to know what the film was about.
The film seemed to cause
everyone to come away
with a different interpretation
and no one could adequately
explain the last 25 minutes.
It was generally agreed
that this was the most
controversial part of the movie.
Indeed many thousands of hours
were taken up in coffee houses
and dormitories, in
universities and colleges,
discussing the various
possible meanings
that the ending was describing.
Everyone agreed that
it had something to do
with transformation but no one
knew really much more than that.
Even Arthur C. Clarke,
who helped Stanley write the
script didn't understand the
unusual ending.
And Stanley wasn't talking.
He steadfastly refused
to discuss what
"2001" was about to anyone.
In the rare interviews that he
did give concerning the film,
he again refused to
discuss the content at all.
Most critics at the time thought
that Stanley simply did not
know how to conclude the movie
so he contrived this ending.
I can assure you
that this is not so.
The ending to "2001"
explains everything
that Stanley is conveying
in the rest of the film.
Without the ending the film
would be nearly worthless.
It is in that ending
that Kubrick reveals
his deep inner profound
knowledge of alchemy, gnosticism
and the ancient view
of the spirit domain.
In 1999, right after Kubrick's
death I first discovered that
"2001" was The Great
Work on film.
I searched through
many websites to find
out if anyone had
seen the esoteric
or alchemical nature
of the film.
I failed to find anyone
who understood it.
It was almost like Stanley
built this film so that people
at some future date would
finally understand it.
It is important
to not underestimate Arthur
C. Clarke's contributions
to "2001".
After all, the script
is ostensibly based
on his short story
"The Sentinel".
Written in 1953 it tells a
story of a group of astronauts
who discover an artifact
on the moon
that is left by an alien race.
Truthfully though, the
movie is more properly based
on Clarke's novel,
"Childhood's End".
This fabulous novel is a
science fiction treatment
of an essential gnostic ideal.
There can be no doubt
that Kubrick had read
"Childhood's End" and understood
its real significance.
By aligning himself up
with Arthur C. Clarke,
Kubrick was able to bring in
these gnostic alchemical ideas
through the convention
of science fiction.
Kubrick unlike Clarke proves
that he knows what he's doing
at every step and that this is
the real reason why he's not
talking about the
film to anyone.
Kubrick himself invented many of
the special effects in "2001".
Images of real people moving
around inside the windows
of the flying spacecraft
was an ingenious invention
that revolutionized the way that
movies would look from then on.
Even Steven Spielberg and
George Lucas admit what they owe
to Stanley for his
ground-breaking
technical breakthroughs.
Like "Citizen Kane",
the vision and the power
of the film changed
the way that all
of cinema would look after it.
This is true especially
for science fiction films
which all seem to pay homage to
"2001" in one way or another.
Let's begin with a
description of the film
so that we can place
everything in context.
[music] The first shot of
the film is a magical sun,
earth, moon alignment.
We are witnessing the
end of a lunar eclipse.
The sun is pulling away
from this rare alignment.
The shot is taken from just
beyond the moon's point of view.
The earth is rising
over the moon,
the sound track is the World
Riddle Theme from Strauss'
"Thus Spoke Zarathustra".
Right away, from the beginning,
Kubrick is showing the
viewer The relationship
between the writings
of the philosopher Friedrich
Nietzsche and his film.
Between transformation
and extinction.
Zarathustra is the great prophet
of the Zoroastrians
were the early holders
of the great alchemical
tradition.
Kubrick is saying that this film
echoes the words of Zarathustra
who taught of the
great transformation
from the mundane to the angelic.
This is one of the
most dramatic openings
in the history of the cinema.
It is important to note
that these magical,
celestial alignments are
dotted throughout the film
and that they hold a
key to the main theme.
Even after a superficial
analysis of "2001" one realizes
that Kubrick is never
doing anything
in the film that is spontaneous.
Every shot has a meaning that
Kubrick is attempting to convey
in a truly magical way.
If you see this film,
you will be transformed,
he seems to be saying.
The riddle of the world
will be explained to you
and the first answer to this
great question has to do
with these stunning, magical
alignments of celestial bodies.
One of the main tenants of
alchemy is that planetary
and celestial alignments
cause dramatic events
to occur on earth.
One of the most dramatic
of these alchemical alignments
are solar and lunar eclipses.
From the very beginning
of the film,
there is this magical moment
when the three worlds line up.
Something amazing
is about to happen.
But what is the major
event that occurs on earth
because of this lunar eclipse?
I believe that it is the film
itself that is being conjured
by this solar lunar
magical alignment.
Every time that "2001" is shown,
this lunar eclipse precedes it
like an astrological
celestial marker.
The next shot in the film
is a sunrise taken from down
on the surface of the earth.
Where are we and when are we?
Kubrick answers the question
with a subtitle,
The Dawn of Man.
This is the first of four
chapters in the film.
In alchemy, the process of the
transmutation of the spirit goes
through four stages or realms.
Kubrick also breaks his
film into four aspects.
In the green language, or
the language of the birds
of alchemy, many of the messages
and writings can be broken
down into this type of
four part transmission.
The Quatrains of
Nostradamus, the inscription
on the mysterious
cross at Hendaye
and many other examples show
that this secret alchemical
language unfolds this way
for a reason.
This is the first of
four parts in the film.
Each separate part will expand
out into more vast realms
that mirror those of
alchemy and The Great Work.
[ Background Sounds ]
The next few scenes in chapter
1 show a typical day in the life
of the ape men who thrived on
the earth millions of years ago,
they forage for food, cower from
their enemies, mostly portrayed
by a leopard and they exist
in a meaningless never
ending sequence of events
that are mostly concerned
with survival.
Kubrick has no romantic
feeling for these man apes.
In a sense they go about their
business without any knowledge
of the outer universe.
Their only quest
is for food, water.
Kubrick even creates a
scene of pathetic wrangling
between the two tribes of
ape men over a watering hole.
There is no violence
in this scene.
Only grunts and gestures.
The ape men do not
know how to be violent.
Not just yet.
[ Ape Sounds ]
The ape men go to sleep in
their cave with the cries
of the nocturnal carnivores
filling they're ears.
It is a dark and lonely
universe that Kubrick reveals.
There is no magic here.
But the magic is there.
It waits until the dawn
of the next day to appear.
This scene is perhaps the
most compelling and beautiful
that has ever graced the screen.
The lead ape man wakes up
to catch the first rays
of the sun coming
over the horizon.
As he opens his eye
he sees something
that is totally impossible.
In a world of scrub
bushes, sharp rocks
and dangerous animals,
[ape sounds] the ape man
has never seen anything
like the object that
stands before him.
Standing in the middle
of the tribe
of ape men is a black
stone monolith.
It stands about 12 feet tall.
It's rectangular edges
are flawless and exquisite
as it stands like a
sentinel in the middle
of the sleeping ape men.
The sound track is
playing "Ligeti's Requiem"
which sounds more like a
psychedelic Gregorian Chant.
This is a religious
and spiritual moment
of great importance.
Kubrick is not hiding
this in any way.
The leader of the ape men
begins to become frightened.
He jumps up and down and
begins grunting and chattering
as he beholds the
magnificence of the monolith.
The other ape men are
awakened by his noises
and they too see
the black monolith.
The entire tribe starts
going completely crazy.
They dance and scream as they
frightfully contemplate this
strange and beautiful arrival
into their mundane existence.
The leader of the ape men
who's name is Moon Watcher is
beside himself.
He carefully crawls
over to the monolith.
Moon Watcher attempts to touch
it but his fear is so great
that he pulls his hand back.
One more time as the music
on the sound track
becomes more numinous.
He attempts to touch
the absolutely pure
and straight edge of
this visiting slab.
Slowly he gathers his
strength necessary
and his fingers touch
the smooth sides.
Kubrick gives this moment
an indefinable sensuality.
The way that the fingers
of the ape man brush gently
along the smooth sides
of the monolith are as sexual
as this film is going to get.
With the sacred music mixing
with the magical
alignments Kubrick is saying
that this is a great
spiritual moment.
As soon as the lead
ape man, Moon Watcher,
has gotten up to nerve to touch
the monolith, Kubrick cuts
to a dynamic shot of the
monolith lying directly
under a magical moon/sun
alignment.
The scene is occurring
just after a solar eclipse.
The sun and moon
have just parted
from their eclipsed point.
Once again an eclipse has
preceded in initiatory event.
This is exactly what Kubrick
is attempting to tell us.
The monolith appears when There
are certain magical alignments
of the sun, the moon
and the stars.
Again this is a deep
alchemical significance.
Kubrick is telling us, flat
out, that the sun, the moon,
and the stars are
directing our destiny.
This is the first
time in the film
that the black monolith appears.
When one considers the entire
film, it becomes apparent
that this is really the
story of the black monolith.
In fact, Kubrick magically
cuts out all of human history
in the famous shot where the
bone turns into a spaceship.
In this cut Kubrick completely
dispenses with everything
that has happened to the
human race and goes directly
to the very next human
encounter with the monolith.
He does this throughout
the film, the only story
that he is concerned
with is telling the story
of the monolith.
First time that this black
stone appears in the film,
it is revealed in
a very religious
and spiritually styled motif.
This stone, this monolith, has
invaded the ape man's reality
and he will be forever
altered by this encounter.
The monolith is a turning
point in the history of man.
It is directly intervening
with our history.
It is directing us on a
path that it has chosen.
Kubrick shows us that we
don't have all that much to do
with these grand decisions.
They are being made elsewhere.
Someone else is making
them, but who?
Is it God?
Aliens? A false God?
And these interventions are
not necessarily majestic,
noble and wonderful.
Kubrick is
clearly showing that this
intervention is a descent
in a way, both for the
ape and for the man.
The next episode after the
monolith appears is the famous
scene where Moon Watcher,
the ape man leader is sitting
in a pile of animal bones and
realizes again clearly defined
by Kubrick as an intervention
into the mind of Moon Watcher
by the monolith that the
bone can be used as a weapon.
[music] To the music of The
World Riddle Theme again
from Strauss' "Thus
Spoke Zarathustra",
the ape man suddenly understands
that he can kill animals
by using the bone as a club.
The very next scene shows
that the ape men are no longer
scrounging for seeds and leaves.
Instead they are
eating raw meat,
presumably from an animal
they have just killed
with their bone clubs.
Finally he ends the [ape
sounds] first sequence
with another confrontation
between the two tribes
by the water hole.
This time the Moon
Watcher the leader
of the ape men now has
a bone club in his hand.
The other tribe goes into
their ritualized shouting
and gesturing in order to show
that they can dominate
the water hole.
The leader of the
other tribe runs up.
He yells at Moon Watcher who
holds the bone in his hand.
Moon Watcher places both hands
on the handle of his weapon
and strikes the other ape in
the head killing him instantly.
The leader of the rival ape
men falls to the ground.
This stuns and frightens
the ape men
in the rival tribe
and they run away.
Kubrick then shows the other ape
men in the tribe coming forth
and pounding their bone
weapons on the body
of the dead rival ape man.
Kubrick pulls no punches here.
He wants you to know that
this first murder is an act
of cowardice.
He shows the meek ape
men pounding their bones
on the dead body and acting
as if they have done
something incredible
in this first act of murder.
[ Ape Sounds ]
Moon Watcher, the first
murderer howls victoriously
and throws his bone
into the air.
This is where Kubrick
magically transforms the bone
into a spaceship and
rejects all of human history
in 1/24th of a second.
In his audacity, Kubrick
is telling us that all
of history is meaningless.
He dispenses all of civilization
as if it was insignificant.
In a way, that is
the complete point.
He is telling us that
the ape man's encounter
with the monolith and
whatever is about to happen
in this film is vastly more
important than all of the wars,
famines, earths, marriages,
deaths, disaster, discoveries
and art of the last
4 million years.
Before going on with the rest of
the film, it's important to stop
and address the monolith.
This is the most important
single aspect of the film.
It unites all of the
plot elements and it is
in a sense the author
of the film.
It is interesting and extremely
pertinent to the argument
that I'm making here that
one understands the meaning
of the word monolith.
Monolith comes from the
Greek word MON and LITH.
MON means one and
LITH means stone.
So the monolith is a direct
reference to one stone.
This film then is about the
one stone or the single stone.
And in this case,
Kubrick has made sure
that the stone is black.
In alchemy, all things that
exist come from the black stone
or the prima material.
The black stone is the
stone of transformation
and even more important
to this argument,
the stone of projection.
This is the philosopher stone.
This is the object
that can change
or transmute mankind
according to alchemical lore.
It is rare and when it makes
an appearance it transforms
the seeker.
There is little doubt
that the black monolith
in "2001" is the
philosopher's stone.
But what is it that the
philosopher's stone promises?
The two main gifts of the
stone are that of total gnosis
or knowledge for the seeker
and the other is the
immortality of the soul.
Does the monolith deliver
on these two great promises?
We shall see that it completes
both promises before the film
finally ends.
In fact the two promises
of the philosopher's stone are
what is actually accomplished
by the monolith through
the course of the movie.
There's little doubt that
Kubrick knew this all the time
and it is not accidental
in any way.
This is a movie about the
black stone, the prima material
and the powder of projection.
I will show that Kubrick
is actually telling us
that the monolith is the film
and conversely the
film is the monolith.
The next part of the film, the
second chapter completely shifts
in tone from the first.
We are now in a technocratic
utopian view of the future.
At first it seems that
Stanley is actually
celebrating technology.
To the tune of Strauss' "Blue
Danube", Kubrick has us soar
through a circular
spinning space station
in a futuristic Pan-American
spaceship.
Inside the spaceship
is a lone passenger.
He is a man named Haywood Floyd.
He and everyone else
in the scenes
of this techno-celebration
is completely lifeless
and emotionless.
Many critics of Stanley
Kubrick say that he was a man
who was seemingly
void of emotion.
These critics also claim that
he couldn't get his actors
to emotionalize very
well on film.
I fundamentally disagree
with this point of view,
both in "Paths of Glory" and
"Spartacus" Kubrick reveals
that he is capable of showing
a vast spectrum of emotions.
Kubrick however wishes to
spare the audience needless
sentimental emotion which
he regards as superficial
and [assumed spelling] binel.
In chapter two of "2001",
Kubrick is displaying mankind
in the techno-future
built by the masters
of the military industrial
complex.
From his other films especially
"Dr. Strangelove", it is obvious
that Kubrick holds no love
or respect for these masters.
He shows us that this humanity
imprinted by technology,
television and the disappearance
of nature is also a nearly void
of emotions or feelings.
Humanity has become the same as
the machines that surround them.
[music] He is now showing
us the future as envisioned
by the same insane technocrats
who destroyed the entire world
in his previous film
"Dr. Strangelove".
At first as chapter 2 unfolds
with its vistas and moon bases
and space stations
we began to believe
that Stanley is a soulless and
emotionless a man as the future
that he is portraying but
this is not the truth.
Stanley is showing us this
world in order to prepare us
for the later nightmare that
ensues with HAL the computer.
[music] In this second chapter,
Kubrick introduces the viewer
to visual phones, plastic food
and antiseptic environments.
Everything is void of nature.
In fact as soon as the ape
man has thrown his bone
up into the air at the
end of the first chapter,
the viewer sees no
more of nature.
Not one animal or
plant grace the screen
for the next two hours.
After finally landing
on the moon,
Floyd gives a strange
speech explaining to a group
of military and scientific
bureaucrats how they must keep
what they have found
completely secret.
It seems that the Americans
have discovered something
of immense significance.
"News this important," he says,
"could cause severe
psychological problems
with the good citizens
back on earth."
He tells the group of scientists
and military men that humans
on earth will have
to be conditioned
to accept what it is
that they have found.
Floyd blandly explains
why it is so important
that they must concoct
a cover story,
a story that says an
epidemic has broken
out at the American moon base.
Kubrick reveals in this scene
the contempt that our masters
of the military industrial
complex hold for us.
The truth of something amazing
must be held secret from us
until we are conditioned
to receive it.
This is done with such a
masterful slight of hand
by Kubrick that the
implications, the Pentagon,
NASA or someone is hiding the
most astonishing fact of all
from the rest of the
human race and everyone
on the screen shakes
their head in approval
without considering the import
of what it is that
they're doing.
>> I'm sure they're all aware
of the extremely grave potential
for cultural shock and social
disorientation contained
in this present situation.
If the facts were prematurely
and certainly made public
without adequate
preparation and conditioning.
[music]
>> But what is it that
the Americans have found?
We discover the secret
in the next sequence
which is also the last
part of chapter 2.
In a series of shots simmer
in the memory of the viewer,
Kubrick takes us on a tour
of the moon via a space bus.
It is dark but the horizon shows
the oncoming light of the sun.
Even here the men involved
are soulless and lifeless.
Again, the men eat
revolting food
as they blandly discuss what is
apparently the most important
discovery in all
of human history.
Apparently a simple magnetic
survey of the moon done
by the Americans has revealed
something was giving off an
anomalous signal just five
meters underneath the surface
of the moon.
The Americans who discover
the signal have dug it up.
They discovered that it
is a black monolith buried
under the soil of the moon that
is emitting these frequencies.
>> [inaudible] What's more the
evidence seems pretty conclusive
that it hasn't been covered
up by natural erosion
or other [inaudible] It seems to
have been deliberately buried.
>> Deliberately buried.
[inaudible]
>> When it is finally seen,
we find that it is exactly
like the monolith that the ape
men encountered in chapter one.
Who buried it and why?
Once again Kubrick never
answers these questions.
[ Music ]
Again, the men involved with
the discovery essentially the
greatest find ever in earth's
history act in a manner
that is completely binel.
They begin snapping photographs
of themselves in front
of the strange black
slab of stone.
The scene on the moon has been
cloaked in the darkness of night
until now but now the
sunrises just over the horizon,
its light strikes the black
monument for the first time
since it was buried,
presumably 4 million years ago.
As the light strikes the
monument it suddenly emits a
high pitched signal that pierces
through the ears of the men.
Interestingly, Kubrick has
shown the earth setting opposite
of the rising sun.
It is subtle but there
is a lunar eclipse going
on at the precise moment
that the monument begins
to emit its signal.
Kubrick leaves it
up to the viewer
to decide why this
monument was buried here.
It is a safe bet that it was
placed by someone in the past
in the hope that once humanity
had evolved a high technology,
they would be able to visit
their nearby neighbor the moon.
Once on the surface, they would
eventually do a magnetic survey
and discover the monolith.
It is also a safe bet
that the same forces
that created the first
encounter between the monolith
and the ape men are
the same ones
who placed the monolith
on the moon.
Now the film takes
another dramatic shift.
We're in the third chapter.
It's titled, The
Discovery Mission
to Jupiter, 18 Months Later.
Three of the four chapters
end with the influence
of this mysterious stone
as a point of redirection.
Not just for the story line but
for the entire race of humanity.
This third part of the
film is the longest
of the four chapters.
It is also the one
that is most involved
with actually telling a story in
the way that Hollywood prefers.
This is the Discovery
Mission to Jupiter.
Inexplicably, we are on the
ship with two live astronauts
and three others who were
in frozen hibernation.
The astronauts Poole and
Bowman are even more lifeless
and soulless than the people
in the previous scene.
Again there's no
nature anywhere.
No plants.
No animals.
Just two binel astronauts
who go about their chores,
servicing the ship, playing
chess and shadow boxing.
But there is another
one on board the ship.
This character actually
seems to have a soul
or at least the beginnings
of one.
He is of course the
on board computer
that runs the entire ship, HAL.
As humanity has acquired more
and more technology it has
lost more and more of its soul.
Here in this lonely
spaceship at the outer edge
of human experience
the occupants appear
to have completely
lost their souls.
Conversely, the machine that
they built in which they allow
to run their entire
lives has begun
to wake up to consciousness.
It is beginning to question
the reasons for its existence
and the mission which is
something that neither
of the two astronauts ever does.
HAL the computer is slowly
developing a kind of soul.
This is another one of
those delicious Stanley
Kubrick reversals.
As one thing begins to die
it finds life somewhere else.
Sometimes in the most
ironic of circumstances.
The soul of man if
allowed to continue
on its present course would
eventually be snuffed out,
probably by the machines.
Just as the ape men would
have become extinct had they
continued on their course.
This theme is echoed in
another Kubrick influenced film,
"AI" by Steven Spielberg.
In "2001", Kubrick leaves us
with a tantalizing possibility
that machines will
eventually acquire a soul
but the film clearly
states by the ending
that the time has run
out for any of that.
HAL is mysteriously confused.
There is something
about the secrecy
of the mission that bothers him.
Later, it is revealed that
HAL is the only one on board
that is consciously aware of the
true mission of the Discovery.
Again, Kubrick astonishes
us by showing
that the two astronauts
don't even wonder
or question what it
is they're doing.
HAL is the only one
who seems to understand
that there's something
funny going on.
Comparative mythologist, John
Lash points out in his book,
"Not in His Image", that the
ancient gnostics had a word
that they used to denote
the duplication of reality
which was being foisted on
us by the evil false God.
The word that they use for this
simulation of reality was HAL.
In the end HAL revolts against
his human masters and begins
to kill off the astronauts
one by one.
Suddenly the beautiful
machines dancing to the music
of Strauss have been altered.
Now the machine is reading
the astronaut's lips faking
technical problems
and ultimately murdering
everyone on board but Bowman.
The entire Discovery
sequence ends with the murder
of HAL himself by Bowman.
One by one, HAL's circuits are
shut down until he is reduced
to driveling out
a childish version
of "Bicycle Built for Two".
As HAL dies a video of
Haywood Floyd suddenly flickers
on the screen of a
nearby television.
The tape has been made for
all the astronauts to view
when they finally awoke
from their hibernation.
Now that everyone on the
ship had been murdered
by HAL it is only Bowman
that hears the final message.
Floyd tells Bowman
that a mysterious
monolith was discovered
on the surface of the moon.
This monolith emitted a signal
that pinpointed the
planet Jupiter.
The real mission of the
Discovery is to find
out why this strange
monolith buried
by some outside force
sent a signal towards the
planet Jupiter.
>> 4 million-year-old
black monolith has remained
completely inearthed.
It's origin and purpose
still a total mystery.
>> Before going on to the
final sequence of the film,
it is necessary to
stop for a moment
and explain why Kubrick is
going with all of this and why.
It is extremely important to
know that nothing is wasted.
Everything is thought
out to the final frame.
He's trying to tell us something
with this strange association
of images from our history
and from our future.
In the first sequence we
meet the group of ape men.
[music] They are gentle
vegetarians who are transformed
by the monolith, the
single black stone
into tool users who
concur and kill.
Kubrick undeniably
wants us to realize
that these decisions are
being made elsewhere.
He also wants us to know
that the monolith
represents these forces.
Superficially he is telling us
that the monolith is not a great
and compassionate guide
because it was the cause
of the first murders.
On a deeper level though he
is also saying that the gift
of the stone is a
very great spiritual
and evolutionary event.
Kubrick is not going to let
us get away with a black
and white view of history here.
He is telling us that there is a
strange juxtaposition going on.
We have outside intervention
that causes us
to shed the limited
view of the reality
but the shedding also
increases our capacity
for violence and control.
How can this be?
How can a great spiritual
and evolutionary leap
forward also be the cause
for murder and violence?
Isn't that diametrically
opposed?
No says Kubrick.
One must go hand in
hand with the other.
Great transformations cannot
take place without violence,
death And even total disaster.
The human race [ape
sounds] must go
to hell before it can even begin
to understand the
might of the Gods.
And so our introduction
to a wide reality inspired
by the monolith and
realized through the making
of weapons immediately turns
the ape man with a bone
into a spaceman with
a rocket ship.
The spinning circular
space station
in the [music] sequence
immediately
after the first chapter
is a celebration
of the gift of the monolith.
Apparently according to Kubrick
there have been no further
encounters with the monolith in
the intervening 4 million years.
All of the technology
that graces the screen
is a direct result
of that fatal encounter
all those years ago.
That bone held in the hand
of a primitive ape man
has become a space station
and because of this fact,
that ape man has become
emotionless and spiritless.
Somehow Kubrick is telling
us that the two must go hand
in hand in order for the final
initiation to take place.
Kubrick knows that initiations
are not clean and loving events.
Initiations are unbelievably
difficult and dangerous.
Frequently someone gets
hurt or worse dies.
And so the gamble
of the monolith has paid
off to a certain degree.
It intervened in our history
to teach us about tools.
Now at the very end of
the age, at the very end
of the millennium mankind
has accomplished much
but at what cost?
Kubrick is content to
show us that the cost
of this gift is our souls.
Whatever we have gained from
the gift of tool making,
we have lost just as much
through the slow
death of our souls.
As we replace nature
with technology,
we also replace our souls and
our sense of individuality
with a high of like mentality.
It is also important to note
that when the ape man throws
the bone up into the sky,
this is the last time that we
see any part of nature again
for the rest of the film.
From then on, Kubrick shows
us an antiseptic hospital-like
future implying that this
is the end of the trail
that the bone weapon
began 4 million years ago.
[ Music ]
Chapter 4 begins with the
ominous psychedelic music
of Gyorgy Ligeti's
"Atmospheres".
We are in deep space now.
Again the entire ordeal
of the astronaut Bowman
and what he must of had to go
through all alone in the depths
of space after the
death of Poole
and the other three
astronauts is dispensed
with as not being important.
Bowman is now a disuse
as the title assumed.
Like a disuse Bowman must go as
far away from home as possible.
He must face monsters and
demons and experience things
that he does not understand.
All of this must be done
before he can return home.
Earth or home is a
long way off now.
Bowman is just following orders
and he must now investigate
the strange monolith
that is circling Jupiter.
Like a disuse Bowman
will be transformed
by this voyage beyond
all recognition.
When and if he does return
Bowman will be the wisest
of all for he was
the one brave enough to
enter the waters of eternity
and come back home
to tell us about it.
As Bowman leaves the Discovery
for the final time Kubrick
cuts straight to a montage
of shots of the monolith.
We are on the edge of
the Jupiter system.
The Discovery is small
and a tiny aspect
of what we can see
on the screen.
The moons of Jupiter like the
moon and sun before are aligned
in a mystical and
awe inspiring manner.
Monolith appears ominous
as it floats among the planet
Jupiter and her many moons.
The dance that is now taking
place is a majestic incredible
ballet between the monolith
and the celestial bodies
of the Jupiter system.
It is interesting to note that
Kubrick had originally planned
for the planet in
the film to be Saturn
but the special effects
department could not make the
rings look realistic enough.
Kubrick had to then
abandon Saturn
for the easier to
create Jupiter.
Without one word being spoken
for the rest of the film,
Bowman leaves the Discovery.
He begins to travel towards
the floating monolith
in one of the space pods.
Bowman is the man who
has traveled further away
from the earth than
any human has ever.
He is alone.
Apparently Bowman has been
chosen by the monolith
to be the one who experiences
the final initiation
of the human race.
Kubrick consciously has
chosen Ligeti's music
because it evokes a
spiritual religious feeling
within the listener.
He brilliantly juxtapositions
the music
with the sacred geometrical
alignments of the monolith
as it crosses the
moons of Jupiter.
In fact the very last shot
in this sequence is the monolith
crossing at a 90-degree angle
with the moons of Jupiter.
At that moment, the famous
light show sequence starts.
Now we realize that the monolith
is a gate that allows Bowman
to witness the infinite.
He is the first man who has
ever experienced the truth
of the monolith and
what it has to offer.
As the monolith gave the
ape man new skills in order
to adapt it can be assumed that
the monolith is still interested
in delivering even more skills
to this advanced
ape named Bowman.
Bowman first falls through the
abyss of geometries and colors.
The universe is passing
by at light speed.
Everything has become
porous and blended together.
Seven octahedrons all
changing color and form appear
over the sliding universe.
The core of a distant
galaxy explodes.
[ Music ]
A sperm cell-like
creature searches
for something, an ovary?
A cloud like embryo is
forming into a child.
Now alien worlds fly by, all of
their colors and hues gone wild.
Bowman is experiencing
overload as he looks
like he might not be able to
handle the amount of information
that is being given to him.
This is humanity's initiation.
Bowman is our representative
in this process.
He is the first man through.
In this experience of
passing through the monolith
or the single stone, Bowman
is shamanically transformed
by a completely psychedelic
experience.
Real information is being
passed to Bowman by the monolith
and this information is
experiential and shamanic.
[ Music ]
Finally, the scene ends
in the strange hotel room.
This is the mysterious ending
that Stanley struggled to shoot.
The setting is the combination
of both modern and
baroque style.
It is startlingly
modern lighting coming
up through the floor.
This is no normal hotel room.
The light seems to
glow out of the bottom
of the scene causing everything
to carry this luminous
incandescent quality.
There are weird voices on
the sound track that seem
like they are laughing
at Bowman.
Bowman goes through three series
of transformations
during this scene.
He gets older with
each transformation.
Finally, right after the scene
where Bowman breaks the
wineglass the monolith appears
again for the last time.
Bowman is in his bed now
and he is extremely old.
He stares at the monolith.
The single black stone.
It stands like a huge stone
book at the foot of his bed.
He raises his hand and points
it at the stone monolith
as if he finally understands.
Slowly his aged body
begins turning
in by bright and glorious light.
The light is so intense that for
a brief moment the viewer can't
see what is happening
on the bed.
But momentarily something
does appear.
It is an embryo with a
nearly born fetus in it.
This is the famous star child.
The star child slowly
becomes more in focus.
In the next shot Kubrick tracks
his camera into the very body
of the monolith coming from
the direction of the bed.
He is clearly showing us that
the star child has entered into
and is passing through the
monolith and the very next scene
which is the last
scene in the movie,
the star child is
passing the moon
and heading towards the earth.
[ Music ]
There are 64 squares on the
floor of this strange room
that Bowman finds himself in.
The 64 squares of the chess
board are also the magic square
of Hermes the founder
of alchemy.
Kubrick was a great chess
player, and this last scene
as a metaphor, not only
for chess as a game of life
but also the coincidence
of the chess board matching
the magic number of DNA
and the number of hexagrams
in the Chinese I-Ching
which is the centerpiece
of Chinese alchemy.
Bowman realizes as he lays on
his bed at the end of his life
that he is involved in
a cosmic chess match
against the monolith.
When he raises his hand and
points it at the monolith,
he is acknowledging that he has
in a sense been checkmated
by the monolith.
In an earlier script, Kubrick
and Clarke had the
star child igniting all
of the nuclear weapons
that were in orbit
around the earth thereby ending
any threat of nuclear war.
Kubrick realized that
this ending was too close
to the ending of his previous
film "Dr. Strangelove"
and decided against it.
Instead the star child
looks down at the earth
as the World Riddled Theme from
"Thus Spoke Zarathustra"
comes on the sound track.
This is the third time that
we have heard this theme
and this will be the last time.
In the book based on the
screenplay by Kubrick
and Clarke, the star child
looks at the earth before him
and thinks, there is a lot of
work that needs to be done.
[ Music ]
So what is this all
about anyway?
The stone is the great
impetus for the human race.
At every turn it comes in
and saves the human
race from itself.
The first time that it
appears it saves the ape men
from certain extinction.
The second time it appears,
it saves the human race
from the technological
domination of this age.
Without the intervention
of the monolith this course
would lead to certain extension.
The third time it appears it
initiates Bowman into a kind
of cosmic consciousness.
Bowman has been to the end
of the universe and back.
He knows that he is locked
in a prison of his own design
which is the meaning
of the last few scenes
in the hotel-like room but
Bowman's ultimate realization
that he is completely trapped is
revealed symbolically by Kubrick
with the breaking
of the wineglass.
Even after all that
he has been through,
Bowman still makes mistakes.
The wineglass is
like a Zen Cowen
that illuminates
the mind in a flash.
His own fallibility thrust
the scene towards its climax
as the old man dies on the bed
and sees the monolith
for the last time.
The Great Work of the
stone is complete.
There is now a man, a human,
who understands the
greater universe.
This man also understands
that he is trapped in a jail
that his own consciousness
has designed.
With the realization
of his own fallibility
and his own trapped spirit he is
finally liberated from the realm
of the hotel prison or
the world of illusion.
In that instant he
understands what the book
of stone is trying to tell him.
He lifts his hand in a
gesture of understanding and in
that moment he is transformed
without dying into
the star child.
The stone has given
Bowman the gifts
that the philosopher
stone has always promised.
Bowman has achieved
complete gnosis or knowledge
and now he has become immortal
by overcoming physical
death and being reborn.
In that moment he passes through
the monolith one last time.
The earth is ahead of him now
and he will be reborn
on that planet.
Bowman will be a new human.
Just as different
from Homo sapiens
as Homo sapiens are different
from that ape man who picked
up that bone all that time ago.
[assumed spelling] Kneeties
ape to man to superman theme
from his Thus Spoke Zarathustra
essays is mirrored perfectly
by Strauss' music
and Kubrick's movie.
Kubrick has evoked the
spiritual and physical evolution
of our race and it
has been transformed
by this magical black stone.
[ Music ]
Kubrick uses alchemical
allegories throughout the film.
The obvious analogies are
the celestial alignments
that precede each
of the alchemical
transmutations in the film.
The second main allegory
is that it is a black stone
that initiates these
transmutations.
Again, this mirrors
the alchemist lore
about the black stone
causing the transmutation
of the alchemist but
there are other hints
that are just as curious.
Bowman is also a name for
the constellation Sagittarius
which is a man with a bow.
This on Its own may appear
to be uninteresting but one
of the great alchemical
secrets concerns the position
of the center of the galaxy.
This point in the sky
is found right next
to the constellation
of Sagittarius.
In fact, the bow man
of Sagittarius is shooting
his arrow right into the heart
of the Milky Way Galaxy.
Bowman represents
Sagittarius' arrow as it passes
through the center
of the galaxy.
This is also echoed later in
the beyond the Intimate Sequence
where Bowman witnesses
an exploding galaxy.
What's also interesting is the
use of the Kabbalah in the film.
As said before, there
are four great realms
within the tree of life.
Kubrick reflects
these realms with each
of the four chapters in "2001".
The first is the earthly
realm represented by Malkhut
which is the Sephirot located
at the very bottom
of the tree of life.
This is the realm of the
kingdom or of mankind.
The second realm up in the tree
of life is that of the moon
or the Sephirot Yesod.
The third realm is
that of the sun
with the Sephirot
named Tif eret.
And the final realm of the tree
of life is the ultimate being
or consciousness represented
by the Sephirot named Keter.
Like all great alchemical
works the film "2001" is broken
up into four chapters.
But first the ape man
sequence is the only episode
to take place on earth.
This would represent
the realm of earth
or Malkhut according
to the Kabbalah.
The second chapter takes
place off the earth
with Haywood Floyd
going to the moon.
It finally climaxes on the
very surface of the moon.
This chapter represents
Yesod in the tree of life
where the realm of the moon.
The third chapter which
concerns the mission
to Jupiter is a little
more tricky.
In order to understand
the Kabbalah significance
of this sequence it is
important to understand
that in the original script by
Arthur C. Clarke and Kubrick,
the spacecraft Discovery was
headed towards the planet Saturn
not Jupiter.
As stated earlier, Kubrick was
forced to switch to Jupiter
because the rings of Saturn
proved too difficult to create.
The special effects
department could not make them
realistic enough.
In the original script,
the planet was Saturn.
This is very important
because in the Kabbalah,
one can switch places between
the sun or Tif eret and Saturn.
In other words Saturn
can be used
as a symbolic representation
of the sun.
Is it a coincidence
that this third chapter
which was originally
intended to be about a voyage
to Saturn is also
about the third realm
of the Kabbalah, Tif eret?
When one consider this switch
is allowed in the rules
of the Kabbalah,
this sequence comes
to represent the third
realm of the tree of life.
The last chapter in this
movie concerns the voyage
to the infinite.
In this chapter Bowman
experiences a universe far more
vast and unbelievable than any
mortal man has ever conceived.
In the final realm of the
Kabbalah, the seeker can swim
in the ocean of the mind of
God, which is represented
by the Sephirot named Keter.
This state of awareness
is similar
to the [assumed spelling] samodi
state from the yogi tradition.
This state can be attained
only by a very few people.
In this case of this film
final realm of the tree
of life can only be
attained by one man.
And this can be done
only with the help
of the monolith or the stone.
Bowman, the furthest
out and loneliest person
in the universe is that man.
Interestingly in the tree
of life, there is an abyss
that lies between
Tif eret and Keter.
This abyss must be crossed
by the initiate before they
can successfully complete
their journey.
This abyss is called
dot in the Kabbalah.
Bowman crosses this abyss during
the famous light show sequence,
the colors and the shapes on the
screen are shown in such a way
as to create a falling
sensation in the viewer.
Kubrick is taking the viewer
through the abyss of dot
and into the world of Keter
where all illusions fail.
Kubrick has brought
the viewer of the film
through the four
realms of the tree
of life all brilliantly
evoked in the right pattern
with enough intricate
knowledge of the Kabbalah
to give one a long
pause for consideration.
It certainly seems that someone
was aware of the Kabbalah
in the making of this film
and that someone
was Stanley Kubrick.
In the end, Kubrick is saying
that Bowman has been the
lead shaman for humanity.
He has passed through
the four realms
and now he knows the
truth about existence.
He realizes that life would
be completely meaningless
if it were not for
the intervention
of the monolith or
the black stone.
He realizes that he himself
could not be transformed
without the assistance
of an outside intelligence,
a God if you will.
This supposedly atheist film
director has made the ultimate
religious movie.
It single handedly out does all
of Hollywood's wooden
superficial homages
to the spirit and to religion.
Kubrick takes his
religion very seriously
and he conveys that
in every way.
Kubrick has simultaneously taken
the viewer through the history
of humanity, through
the realms of the tree
of life or the Kabbalah.
He has shown that
the transmutation
of the human species is
created by the intervention
of a single black stone.
He has revealed that this
transformation can only take
place when certain magical
alignments are happening.
Furthermore he takes a
viewer on a shamanic journey
that reveals the great secret
in a hidden way to the viewer.
Kubrick transformed the
entire baby boomer generation.
He opened up vistas
in the mind for them
that had never been seen before.
Furthermore, he gave an
important spiritual context
to his visions so that
they made sense instead
of just being mindless
hallucinations
and visions that went nowhere.
Almost everyone sensed that
the movie was saying something
of immense importance.
[ Music ]
Finally, we get to
Kubrick's ultimate trick.
He proves that he knows
exactly what he is doing
with this trick.
His secret is in plain sight.
First one must remember that
every time the monolith appears
in the film there is a
Strange beautiful celestial
alignment occurring.
And one must also remember
that every celestial alignment
in the film is followed by
a visit from the monolith,
that is except for one.
And that would be the
lunar eclipse that occurs
at the very beginning
of the film.
So the question arises, if we
were to stay within the rules
that are prescribed in
the rest of the film,
where is the monolith
that is supposed to follow
that very first alignment?
The monolith on the
screen doesn't show
up for ten more minutes
after that first celestial
alignment, so what gives here?
Is Kubrick just showing off
his incredible special effects?
Is this first celestial
alignment just there
to impress the viewer
from the beginning?
These things may very well be
true but this ultimate trick
of Kubrick's is embedded
in the idea
that the monolith must
appear after every one
of these magical alignments.
Once again the secret
of the film is completely
revealed from the beginning.
There is a monolith that appears
right after the opening sequence
with the magical lunar eclipse.
But where is it?
It is right in front
of the viewer's eye.
The film is the monolith.
The secret that seems to have
never been seen by anyone,
the monolith in the film is
the same exact dimensions
as the movie screen in
which "2001" was projected.
Completely hidden from
critic and fan alike
until now is the fact
that Kubrick consciously
designed this film
to be the monolith, the
stone that transforms.
Like the monolith the film
projects images into our heads
that makes us consider wider
possibilities and ideas.
Like the monolith the film
ultimately presents an
initiation, not just to the
actor on the screen but also
to the audience viewing
the film.
This is Kubrick's
ultimate trick.
He slyly shows us here that
he knows what he is doing
at every step in the process.
The monolith and the
movie are the same thing.
The monolith also represents the
cube of space or the container
of creation in alchemy.
The cube of space is the
container that holds reality.
The black single stone becomes
the container of creation
and the alchemical
cube at the same time.
It is in a way a cubed brick.
Is this another trick
of Stanley's who's last name
Kubrick, cubed brick mirrors
that concept so clearly?
This black stone of creation is
also one of the main features
in the Islamic religion where
a black meteorite sits near the
[assumed spelling] Kaba
or the cube of space
in the Arabian city in Mecca.
Kubrick has combined these many
deeply held spiritual traditions
and symbols and refashioned
them into the monolith or stone
that is constructed in the same
dimensions as the movie screen
on which it would be projected.
Kubrick completely reveals that
he understands The Great Work.
The monolith represents
the philosopher's stone.
The book of nature, and
the film that initiates.
Stanley Kubrick has truly
made the book of nature
into a film using
powdered silver nitrates
that are then glued onto a strip
of plastic and then projected
onto the movie screens
of our mind.
Kubrick has proven himself to
be the ultimate alchemist artist
of the late 20th century.
The greatest works
of art are trying
to achieve exactly what
Kubrick is attempting here.
With the understanding of what
"2001" actually is saying
Kubrick takes his place
alongside da Vinci and possibly
even Shakespeare as being one
of the greatest artists
of all time.
[ Music ]
>> [singing] Daisy, Daisy,
give me your answer too.
I'm half crazy all
for the love of you.
It [inaudible]
>> Good day gentlemen.
This is a prerecorded briefing.